---
layout: post
title:  "So what's the deal with physics?"
date:   2022-12-01 9:48:18 -0800
categories: Physics
---
The following posts are inspired by a series of discussions I have been having with a friend in the computer science department at UC Santa Barbara. The story goes like this: 

Over the last couple of years my friend and I have been chatting about the kinds of research problems we are interested in studying. In the process, we realized we have very similar perspectives on how to go about solving problems even though our backgrounds are very different. I know very little about the relationship that exists between formal mathematics and computer science theory and my friend knows very little about physics aside from what you see in high school. Naturally we could not help ourselves. We had to ask whether there exists a common ground between our fields/interests! And so I set out to try and help my friend get a feel for all the hype that surrounds physics.    

One of the more frustrating consequences of specializing in a particular field is the "tunnel vision" you end up acquiring. While particular phrases begin to carry significant meaning to you, there are entire fields that will have no idea what you are talking about. In my opinion, physics is especially susceptible to this. Especially because you have both experimental and theoretical experts dictating the direction of the field. As a result of this I feel as though the results of state of the art experiments outweigh the underlying structure -- or asusmptions -- of the theory used to draw conclusions. In short, as the field of physics matures and inevitably becomes more complicated, the philosophical questions underpinning the foundations of the field are somewhat lost. 

Sure, returning to a more "philosophical" description of physics may be impractical and really just one of those romantic, overzealous claims you make at the beginning of an academic paper (or apparently a blog post -- whoops), but I do think we owe it to ourselves to be more explicit with our claims when outlining the rules that apparently govern our reality. This is why I find Noether's theorem so interesting! Emmy Noether, of whom the theorem is named after, was a mathematician primarily concerned with differential geometry and it would probably be fair to assume she viewed "physical laws" of secondary importance. I mean manifolds seem pretty cool in their own right! Yet, Noether's theorem has proven to be of such importance in physics that it often shows up in undergraduate classical dynamics courses with the hopes of getting students primed for its application in field theories -- that's at least where I first saw it! This apparently shows that Noether's theorem is rather overarching: a theorem that can be applied to a single particle described classically, or a collection of "quantum bodies." This provides us with the opportunity to explore how the underlying mathematical structure of Noether's theorem can be exploited in such seemingly different flavors of physics.

This was really pointed out by John Baez in his paper titled "Getting to the Bottom of Noether's Theorem" and what follows is me exploring the ideas that he presents in this paper. Hopefully it becomes somewhat clear that by paying attention to the algebraic structure of the physics theory of interest you can begin to appreciate more generally the key mathematical concepts that a particular flavor of physics relies on. Otherwise "paradoxical" features of a theory such as quantum mechanics then become a bit clearer. Perhaps even pointing to formulations of classical mechanics that look eerily similar as well as providing a framework to reformulate physics theories as a programming language with the hopes removing otherwise ambiguous syntax that physicists often fall victim to. This post is therefore just one in a series of future posts I hope to write that explore these collective ideas. 
